If somebody asked you what the deadliest
mountain in the world is, your first
thought would probably wander to ones
that are obviously very dangerous like
Mount Everest. Or maybe even K2 if
you're familiar with the world's second
tallest mountain's brutal reputation. If
you were limited to answering the
deadliest mountain in the United States,
you might think of examples like Denali
in Alaska, Mount Rainier in Washington,
or Mount Hood in Oregon. All of these
mountains indeed have infamous
reputations and they all look extremely
intimidating as well. That's probably at
least partially why you actually heard
about them. But what if I told you that
instead, the deadliest mountain in
America, and indeed the deadliest
mountain in the entire world, isn't
actually any of these, but is rather a
much much smaller and unassuming looking
mountain in New Hampshire that you've
maybe never even heard about if you're
not from around here, that's called
Mount Washington.
With a total elevation of 6,288
ft above sea level, Mount Washington is
the tallest summit that can be found
anywhere in New England and more broadly
anywhere in the entire northeast region
of the United States. Nonetheless, when
compared to the elevations of mountains
elsewhere across the western US, Mount
Washington appears as basically a dwarf
mountain. Despite being the tallest
mountain in the northeast, it is only
the 550th
tallest mountain nationwide with
literally hundreds of mountains taller
than it dotted all across states west of
the Mississippi, across the Rockies, the
Sierra Nevada, and the Cascades. In
fact, it's less than half the height of
dozens of mountains found across
Colorado and Alaska. And yet, it has
claimed more people's lives than nearly
all of them anyway. Since 1948, more
than 32 people have died on Mount
Washington due to a combination of
falls, avalanches, and hypothermia. More
than every other mountain in the United
States other than Denali, Mount Rainier,
and Mount Hood. Mount Washington is tied
for the fourth highest number of deaths
on any mountain in the country, tied
with Grand Teton in Wyoming. And of
course, the principal attribute of Mount
Washington that sets it apart from all
of these other deadly mountains is its
dramatically shorter height. Mount
Washington is less than a third the
height of Denali and is roughly half the
height of Mount Rainier, Mount Hood, and
Grand Teton, despite having the same
number of fatalities since 1948 as the
latter. Since modern record keeping
began a century before that in 1848,
more than 160 people are known to have
lost their lives on Mount Washington.
Adjusted for the number of deaths per
foot of vertical climb, Mount Washington
becomes not only the deadliest mountain
in America, but the deadliest mountain
anywhere in the world. A fact that
becomes all the more strange when you
realize that you can simply drive a car
or take a train all the way up to the
summit. Unlike any of these other super
deadly mountains that are dramatically
taller than it, where the only way up is
basically to climb.
This is, in a sense, precisely what
makes Mount Washington so deadly. The
fact that it simply doesn't appear to be
deadly when all of the other mountains
do on the list of deadliest mountains.
Denali is in an extremely remote
location in rural Alaska that isn't
connected to any roads. You basically
have to charter a plane just to fly you
to Denali's base camp, and climbing up
from there and back again often takes
weeks to accomplish through massive
glaciers and crevasse fields that are
apparent from miles away before you even
get there. Mount Rainier is similarly
covered in glaciers, full of cavernous
crevasses that are large enough to
swallow up entire houses all that you
can see from far away. While hiking up
more than 10,000 vertical feet through
all of that in order to reach the summit
serves as too much of a deterrent for
most. The kind of people who decide to
climb these kinds of mountains are
usually well aware of how dangerous they
are and have spent a serious amount of
time and effort preparing to tackle
them.
Mount Washington, on the other hand,
doesn't really look all that different
from just about any other mountain
within its range in New Hampshire, the
White Mountains. There aren't any
glaciers that are present to frighten
people away, [music] and unlike many of
the other deadliest mountains, it's
hardly in a remote location that's
difficult to get to. [music] It's only
about a 3 and 1/2 hour drive from the
big city of Boston to reach the parking
lot at the base of the mountain. And
from there, it can only take all of
about 2 hours for an unprepared hiker to
get in way over their heads and
capabilities. The summit of Mount
Washington is actually the sixth most
visited mountain summit in the world,
largely because of how accessible it is
from major metropolitan areas like
Boston, the fact that you can usually
just drive or take a train all the way
up to the summit, and its status as the
highest peak in New England in the
Northeast. But all of the other mountain
summits in the top most visited are
either much shorter and therefore safer,
or they're much higher and therefore
people know to prepare better. Mount
Washington is basically at this weird
middle sort of height, where
underprepared climbers or even drivers
expecting something easier might get
caught off guard, especially when luck
doesn't favor that.
It's not really Mount Washington's
height that makes it so incredibly
deadly, though. It's the fact that the
mountain, arguably, is the site of the
worst weather that can be found anywhere
on planet Earth, despite its rather
unassuming-looking appearance. Let's
start with wind and explain why Mount
Washington is actually the single
windiest location anywhere in the world.
On an afternoon day in April of 1934,
researchers at the summit of Mount
Washington at the Mount Washington
Observatory measured wind speed that
should have been impossible, an
astonishing 231
mph. To put that in a perspective, in
order to become a category 5 hurricane,
wind speeds only need to reach 157 mph.
231 mph is enough to obliterate any
house made out of wood, and will even
cause serious structural issues to
well-built houses. For decades, that
measurement on the top of Mount
Washington was the fastest wind speed
ever measured anywhere on the Earth's
surface until it was surpassed in 1996
by a monster tropical cyclone that
clocked in at a speed of 254 miles per
hour off the western coast of Australia.
It is still the fastest wind speed ever
measured on the Earth's surface outside
of the context of a tropical cyclone or
a tornado. Hurricane force winds or wind
speeds greater than 75 miles per hour
are generally observed on the summit of
Mount Washington for an average of 110
days a year or for nearly one out of
every three days. And during the winter
season, the wind speeds will be at or
above hurricane force about every other
day on average. The most consistently
dangerously fast winds that are
experienced anywhere in the world.
These wicked fast winds that blow over
Mount Washington are of course a
frequent and significant hazard. And
they happen for an interesting
combination of reasons. Mount
Washington, while not exactly a tall
mountain compared to those out west, is
still a giant in the east. Its summit is
the highest geographic point for nearly
a thousand miles away in every
direction. It happens to exist at almost
exactly the midpoint between the North
Pole and the Equator and it's hit
precisely at the intersection of three
major weather systems from the Atlantic
to its south, from the Arctic to its
north and its west and from the Gulf of
Mexico to its far southwest. These three
clashing weather systems bring warm,
humid tropical air from the southwest,
moist maritime air from the Atlantic,
and cool drier continental air from the
north all precisely to the summit of
Mount Washington where they clash and
generate powerful low pressure systems
and strong pressure gradients, which
drives the freak storms and extreme
winds up there. Wind is usually slowed
down by friction from the ground, but
since Mount Washington is by far the
highest point anywhere around for
thousands of miles in most directions.
The higher winds that strike it haven't
ever been slowed down by this usual
process. The overall presidential range
that Mount Washington crowns in the
north forms a B shape that points
directly where the cold winds blowing
across southern Canada come from. As the
higher winds that haven't been slowed
down for thousands of miles reach the
presidential range, they're suddenly
forced upward and accelerate in speed
through a process known as the Venturi
effect. Similar to how a river's
velocity increases as it passes over a
rapid, this, combined with a clashing of
cool dry air with warm moist air, is
what can create some of the most
freakish weather on the planet up here,
and going well beyond just the insane
wind speeds.
As you'd expect for a mountain at its
elevation and its latitude, it gets
pretty cold up on the summit of Mount
Washington. The summit's all-time low
recorded temperature was -50° Fahrenheit
back in January of 1885.
A high temperature of 0° Fahrenheit
still occurs about 13 days a year, while
low temperatures at or below 0°
Fahrenheit usually happens every single
day between the middle of November and
the start of April. Between December and
March across the winter season, the
temperature on the summit will only get
above freezing for an average of just 15
days. Across the whole year, the average
ambient temperature on the summit is
just 27° Fahrenheit. Now, a lot of that
might not sound too bad, to be honest,
but you have to remember that none of
those ambient temperatures take into
account the crazy fast wind speeds and
the absolutely bone-shattering wind
chill effect they have. To give you just
an idea of how nuts this can get,
consider the horror that the mountain
summit experienced on the 16th of
January in 2004. That day, the ambient
temperature on Mount Washington summit
was -46.3°
Fahrenheit or -42° Celsius. Already very
cold, but it was also sustaining wind
speeds of just over 87 miles per hour,
too. As a result, the wind chill value
on the summit that day was a brutal
-102.6°
F,
or -74.7°
C.
Enough to cause frostbite to exposed
human tissue in under 5 minutes and
lethal in as little as 30 minutes
without proper Arctic survival gear. And
then, somehow, even that brutal record
was beaten pretty recently over the
night of the 3rd to 4th of February
2023, when an ambient temperature of
-47° F and faster wind speeds of more
than 100 mph produced a new record low
US wind chill temperature on the
mountain summit of -108°
F. Simply put, that is nearly as cold
Simply put, that is nearly as cold as
the coldest surface air temperature ever
recorded in history, which was measured
at -128.6°
F in 1983 at the Vostok Station deep
within the interior of Antarctica. The
summit of Mount Washington can therefore
literally get as cold as the depths of
Antarctica can during the winter, and it
is rather surprisingly the site of the
coldest temperature ever measured
anywhere in the United States, even
beating out anywhere in Alaska. During
that event in 2004, when the wind chill
effect plunged the temperature down to
as low as -102.6°
F,
the wind chill never once rose to be
warmer than -50° F
for more than 71 hours, or for nearly
three straight days. Even throughout the
summer months, temperatures can
unexpectedly plunge and winter-like
conditions can exist at the summit,
which is the next big dangerous problem
on the mountain.
Due to Mount Washington's location along
clashing weather patterns, its relative
proximity to the Great Lakes that brings
lake effect snow along with the Canadian
winds, and its relatively high elevation
compared with its surroundings, Mount
Washington gets a ton of snow, which is
extremely unusual for its modest
elevation. Mount Washington's summit
will see an average of almost 97 inches
of precipitation per year, the vast
majority of which falls on it as snow,
which is surprisingly even more
precipitation than the summit of Mount
Rainier in Washington receives, despite
it being about twice as tall. Mount
Washington receives by far the most snow
of any mountain of its height or lower
anywhere in the United States. For
basically the same reasons why it's so
windy up there, too. Huge volumes of
snow will get picked up all along the
lower Presidential Mountains and then
gets blown up around Mount Washington
over to its eastern side, where the snow
packs and fills up deep ravines there
like Tuckerman, that can sometimes reach
up to 50 feet deep during the winter. In
the winter and the spring, this thickly
packed snow, especially in Tuckerman
Ravine, can morph into an almost
concrete like layer that can easily
fracture and generate avalanches, which
is a major hazard for hikers and
backcountry skiers all throughout the
winter and spring seasons as well. Many
of whom might not expect such a
potentially high avalanche risk for such
a relatively small mountain. As recently
as 2024, backcountry skiers have lost
their lives because of this here in the
Tuckerman Ravine by falling hundreds of
feet. And as recently as 2012, a man
slipped and slid down the side of
Tuckerman Ravine in April [music] and
then fell into a hidden crevasse. And
his body wasn't able to be recovered for
7 weeks. Others have gone missing on the
mountain for years until their remains
were discovered, sometimes [music] being
buried beneath dozens of feet of snow
during particularly catastrophic
avalanche events. While others simply
wander off too far away from the road or
the railroad that takes you up safely to
the summit and get trapped alone up
there when the weather suddenly turns
for the worse. Near the summit, it can
literally go from relatively nice to
blizzard-like and life-threatening
within minutes. While temperatures can
plunge by upwards of 20° just as
quickly, and they're very difficult to
predict. And if all of those hazards
weren't enough, there's also the added
concern of what is often very, very
limited visibility on the summit of
Mount Washington as well. With all the
wind, storms, and precipitation that
falls on Mount Washington, cloud cover
up there is nearly constant all
throughout most of the year. In fact,
only about 50 days out of the entire
year on average are clear on the summit
between sunrise to sunset. Visibility
conditions near the summit can and do
rapidly deteriorate within minutes
sometimes, just like with the
temperature. Including complete
whiteouts and literally zero visibility
where you can't even see more than a
foot or two ahead of you. These poor
visibility conditions, when they happen
suddenly and unexpectedly, can be
particularly dangerous for hikers or
backcountry skiers when they're nearby
[music] massive cliffs and drop-offs
like the Tuckerman Ravine, which
features plunges of up to 600 ft in some
locations. If you get blinded during a
total whiteout up there to become
disoriented on your location, it's not
inconceivable to see how you might just
take one wrong step into an abyss like
that.
Now, there's a lot of places in the
world that have worse conditions in a
single category than Mount Washington
does, but very few of them combine all
of these factors together in such an
overwhelmingly negative way. The Vostok
Research Station in the middle of
nowhere in Antarctica might get colder
than Mount Washington does, but it has
nowhere near the same level of wind
speeds with a yearly average of just 11
mph, and it also receives virtually zero
precipitation or snowfall either.
Hurricane and tornado-prone areas may
experience similar freak wind speeds,
but they're nowhere near as frequent,
and they're never in areas that get
anywhere near as cold. Denali in Alaska
might have a much higher summit and
lower oxygen levels in a more remote
location with similar visibility issues,
but Denali gets virtually zero
precipitation and doesn't get anywhere
near as windy.
And again, for the most part, Mount
Washington doesn't exactly appear to be
dangerous for most of the climb up it
until you get beyond the mountain's tree
line. The wicked fast winds that whip
across Mount Washington contribute to a
very unusually short tree line at only
about 4,400 ft up in elevation with the
climate any further up simply too
hostile to support any plant life more
than just a few inches in height. The
climate also radically changes very
quickly as you climb up Mount
Washington. In [music] the mountain's
parking lot, you're experiencing a humid
continental climate that's typical for
New England, but as you move up it, you
quickly transition through a subarctic
climate until you reach the end of the
tree line where it immediately
transitions into a tundra climate not
too dissimilar from Labrador or
Greenland the rest of the way up to the
summit. This can often catch hikers off
guard on Mount Washington who don't
expect to be going from a calm walk
through the woods at the mountain's
lower elevations to a potentially lethal
walk through the Labrador or Greenland
tundra further up beyond the tree line.
The treeless upper reaches of the
mountain towards the summit are fully
exposed with zero cover to hide behind
or take shelter in when weather
conditions rapidly turn for the worse
with the infamous super fast winds,
whiteouts, and plunging temperatures.
The total of 65 acres of Mount
Washington's peak is classified as
tundra terrain, which is, again, perhaps
unexpectedly the most tundra present on
any mountain east of the Rockies. The
potentially extreme, life-threatening
danger of being exposed to the brutal
elements beyond the tree line on your
climb up towards the summit is not
apparent to most people who climb the
mountain, and it's only when you're far
removed from both the tree line and the
summit about halfway up that you might
realize just how deep into this quiet
danger zone you've gotten yourself into.
While the elevation of the tree line
ends at 4,400 ft above sea level, it
only takes about 3 mi worth of hiking
from the parking lot in order to reach
it, which is notably significantly less
hiking than it even takes to reach the
base camp on Mount Rainier in
Washington. In other words, you can
reach the most dangerous zone on Mount
Washington before you even reach the
base camp on Mount Rainier, which is a
recipe for disasters for hikers who
aren't coming as well prepared as they
usually do for Rainier. Near where the
tree line ends on Mount Washington, the
US Forest Service has put up ominous
signs on trails like this one, warning
that the area ahead beyond the trees
contains the worst weather in America,
and that hikers have lost their lives to
the elements out there exposed even
during the summer.
Then, there's also the fact that Mount
Washington is actually a lot more of a
climb than many people might initially
expect as well. While it is only the
550th tallest mountain in the United
States by elevation above sea level,
Mount Washington's prominence is
substantially more impressive than that.
Prominence is a measurement of how much
a mountain stands out relative to its
surrounding terrain, and is basically
the vertical distance between a mountain
summit and the lowest point you have to
descend to before climbing up a higher
peak. In Mount Washington's case, you
have to descend from its summit all the
way down to 140 ft in elevation at the
Champlain Canal before journeying toward
a higher peak at the Potato Knob all the
way down in North Carolina. This means
that nearly all of Mount Washington's
sea level elevation is pure prominence,
since it rises from a very low
elevation. 6,148
ft of its height is prominence to be
precise. And this gives Mount Washington
astoundingly the 24th highest prominence
of any mountain in the contiguous 48 US
states beyond Alaska and Hawaii with a
greater prominence than even some of the
14,000 footers out west in Colorado like
the well-known Pikes Peak. This means
that despite its overall elevation being
only a fraction of most mountains out
west, actually hiking up Mount
Washington includes a similar vertical
height to that that hikers truly
experience. Something that inexperienced
hikers who only look at elevation values
alone might not anticipate or plan for.
Few might plan more seriously for a
14,000 foot mountain than a 6,000 foot
mountain without realizing that the
actual vertical climb you experience on
both of them will be comparable.
There are just so many factors at play
on Mount Washington that deceive people
into underestimating its true hidden
danger only for them to end up getting
trapped unprepared, exposed to the
brutal freezing blinding windy weather
with nowhere to hide all to either fall
down off of a cliff or to succumb to
hypothermia and the elements.
Mount Washington's reputation to serious
climbers is such that it's actually a
preferred training ground for the way
higher peaks up in the Himalayas like
Everest and K2 because you can
experience similar weather and climatic
conditions on Mount Washington as them
without the added threat and danger of
altitude sickness complicating things
even further. And that's great and can
be managed when you're prepared to face
it, but it's not at all for when you're
not. And there are many many examples
from history of the more than 160
recorded deaths that have taken place on
it since 1848.
There's an entire Wikipedia list that is
specifically dedicated to all of these
victims. If you'd like to go down the
rabbit hole into their individual
stories later.
And while you're probably not planning a
dangerous hike on Mount Washington, even
your usage of the internet right now in
the safety of your own home can still be
dangerous. And a great way to add a
layer of security to whatever it is you
do on the internet is by using a trusted
VPN. Like this video's sponsor, NordVPN.
With NordVPN's no logs policy, your
internet service provider isn't able to
see whatever it is you're searching and
neither does NordVPN, which actually
gives you a true incognito viewing
experience on the internet that Google's
incognito mode doesn't truly provide. I
especially like to use Nord whenever I'm
using unfamiliar Wi-Fi networks at
airports or cafes. And Nord is much more
than just a VPN. I've known creator
friends here on YouTube who've gotten
their accounts hacked after a successful
fishing attempt or a password leak. have
even seen one or two of them every so
often whenever a normal channel you love
suddenly becomes a crypto hype machine
seemingly out of nowhere. This
unfortunately happens way too often and
NordVPN's threat protection includes
specific features that warn you about
fishing leaks. Along with features like
a blocker for malicious ads and dark web
monitoring to alert you if any of your
passwords have been leaked.
And of course, NordVPN also does great
VPN things, too. With Nord, you can
safely browse the internet anonymously
and your location always stays private.
It enables me to set my location
anywhere in the world and access all the
different versions of my favorite
websites. And it's the fastest working
VPN on the planet that provides 24/7
customer support to help you whenever
you need it, along with a 30-day
money-back guarantee for all users. So,
if you'd like to give NordVPN a try,
scan the QR code here on your screen
right now or click the link down below
in the description. Every purchase of
the 2-year plan will receive four bonus
months on top and it's completely
risk-free with Nord's 30-day money-back
guarantee. So, click or scan to get
started with NordVPN today and as
always, thank you so much for watching.